.TH MCANGEN 1 "2026-04-22" "mcangen 1.9.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mcangen \- high-performance CAN bus frame generator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mcangen
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIINTERFACE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mcangen
sends CAN frames with configurable IDs, DLC, data patterns, and rate to a
Linux SocketCAN interface. It is designed for testing and benchmarking CAN bus
stacks and hardware.
.PP
Frames can use standard (11-bit) IDs, extended (29-bit) IDs, or a random mix
of both. Data length codes range from 0 to 8 bytes. Payload bytes can be
random, all zeros, all ones, or an incrementing counter. The frame rate can be
set precisely or left unlimited for maximum throughput.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I INTERFACE
CAN interface name (e.g. \fBcan0\fR, \fBvcan0\fR).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-count " " \fIN\fR
Exact number of frames to send. 0 means unlimited (default: \fB0\fR).
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-rate " " \fIFPS\fR
Target frames per second. 0 means send as fast as possible (default: \fB5\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-dlc\-min " " \fIN\fR
Minimum data length code, 0\(en8 (default: \fB0\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-dlc\-max " " \fIN\fR
Maximum data length code, 0\(en8 (default: \fB8\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-id\-min " " \fIID\fR
Minimum CAN ID in hex or decimal (default: \fB0x000\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-id\-max " " \fIID\fR
Maximum CAN ID in hex or decimal. Clamped to 0x7FF for standard or
0x1FFFFFFF for extended/mixed IDs (default: \fB0x7FF\fR for standard,
\fB0x1FFFFFFF\fR for extended/mixed).
.TP
.BR \-\-id\-kind " " \fIMODE\fR
ID type: \fBstandard\fR (11-bit), \fBextended\fR (29-bit), or \fBmixed\fR
(default: \fBstandard\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-ext\-id\-above\-sff " " \fItrue\fR|\fIfalse\fR
Ensure extended (29-bit) IDs are always greater than 0x7FF so they cannot be
mistaken for standard (11-bit) IDs on the receiving side (default: \fBtrue\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-id\-mode " " \fIMODE\fR
How CAN IDs are selected: \fBrandom\fR or \fBsequential\fR
(default: \fBrandom\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-data\-mode " " \fIMODE\fR
How frame data bytes are filled: \fBrandom\fR, \fBzero\fR, \fBcounter\fR,
\fBsequence\fR, \fBones\fR, or \fBquality\-test\fR (default: \fBrandom\fR).
In \fBsequence\fR mode the 8 payload bytes form a big-endian 64-bit sequence
number starting at 0. In \fBquality\-test\fR mode, payloads follow the
CANcorder quality-test protocol: bytes 0\(en1 are the magic marker 0xCAFE,
bytes 2\(en3 a big-endian 16-bit sequence number, bytes 4\(en5 a big-endian
16-bit millisecond timestamp offset, byte 6 the test ID (see
\fB\-\-test\-id\fR), and byte 7 an XOR checksum of bytes 0\(en6. DLC is forced
to 8 in this mode.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-seed " " \fISEED\fR
RNG seed for reproducible runs. 0 uses a random seed (default: \fB0\fR).
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-progress " " \fIN\fR
Print a stats line to stderr every \fIN\fR frames. 0 prints only the final
summary (default: \fB0\fR).
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress all output except errors.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-dump
Dump each sent frame to stdout in candump format. Uses a bounded internal
buffer; at very high rates some frames may be silently dropped from the
dump output without affecting actual transmission. Disables the live stats
line.
.TP
.BR \-\-burst
Enable burst mode: alternate between a high-rate and a low-rate phase,
emulating the intermittent traffic pattern of ECU reprogramming sessions.
Mutually exclusive with \fB\-\-rate\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-burst\-high\-rate " " \fIFPS\fR
Frames per second during the high-rate burst phase (default: \fB5000\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-burst\-low\-rate " " \fIFPS\fR
Frames per second during the low-rate idle phase (default: \fB50\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-burst\-high\-ms " " \fIMS\fR
Duration of the high-rate phase in milliseconds (default: \fB2000\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-burst\-low\-ms " " \fIMS\fR
Duration of the low-rate phase in milliseconds (default: \fB500\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-test\-id " " \fIID\fR
Test ID byte (0\(en255) embedded in \fBquality\-test\fR payloads. Allows
multiple concurrent test runs to be distinguished (default: \fB0\fR).
.SS UDS Flash Mode
.TP
.BR \-\-uds\-flash
Enable UDS flash simulation mode. Generates a realistic ECU reprogramming
session directly on the CAN bus, with both tester and ECU frames visible.
The session follows a 16-phase sequence: extended diagnostic session,
ECU identification reads, programming session, security access (seed/key),
communication control, DTC disable, programming precondition check,
memory erase (with NRC 0x78 pending responses), firmware download request,
multi-frame ISO-TP data transfer (50\(en150 blocks of 200\(en256 bytes),
transfer exit, dependency check, DTC read/clear/verify, and ECU hard reset.
.sp
In this mode, \fB\-n\fR sets the number of sessions (0 = loop forever).
Between sessions, OBD-II polling traffic is generated unless \fB\-\-no\-obd\fR
is given. Mutually exclusive with \fB\-\-burst\fR. The options \fB\-\-rate\fR,
\fB\-\-data\-mode\fR, \fB\-\-id\-*\fR, and \fB\-\-dlc\-*\fR are ignored.
.TP
.BR \-\-tester\-id " " \fIID\fR
CAN ID for tester/diagnostic tool requests in UDS flash mode
(default: \fB0x7E0\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-ecu\-id " " \fIID\fR
CAN ID for ECU responses in UDS flash mode (default: \fB0x7E8\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-speed " " \fIFACTOR\fR
Timing multiplier for UDS flash mode. Values above 1.0 speed up the
simulation; values below 1.0 slow it down (default: \fB1.0\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-transfer\-blocks " " \fIN\fR
Number of data transfer blocks per UDS flash session. 0 picks a random
count between 50 and 150 (default: \fB0\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-obd
Skip OBD-II polling traffic between UDS flash sessions.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-errors
Disable error injection in UDS flash mode. Without this flag, the simulator
occasionally injects busy retries (3%), security access failures (15%),
wrong block sequence errors (2%), and response-pending delays (5%).
.TP
.BR \-\-auto\-restart
On controller BUS-OFF, cycle the interface (down + up) via netlink to
recover. Required for drivers that don't implement \fBdo_set_mode\fR
(notably \fBgs_usb\fR / candleLight / Canable v1) — for those, the
kernel's \fBrestart-ms\fR mechanism and the manual
\fBip link set <iface> type can restart\fR trigger both return
\fBEOPNOTSUPP\fR, so userland is the only place recovery can happen.
Requires \fBCAP_NET_ADMIN\fR; on \fBEPERM\fR the flag is silently
disabled for the rest of the run with a one-shot warning. Repeated
rapid restarts back off exponentially up to 60\ s. See the
\fBRESILIENCE\fR section for the full state-machine.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Send 10000 random frames as fast as possible on can0:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen can0 \-r 0 \-n 10000
.fi
.RE
.PP
Send at 500 fps with mixed standard and extended IDs:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen vcan0 \-r 500 \-\-id\-kind mixed \-n 5000
.fi
.RE
.PP
Sequential IDs, fixed DLC of 4, counter payload, with progress:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen can0 \-\-id\-mode sequential \-\-dlc\-min 4 \-\-dlc\-max 4 \\
    \-\-data\-mode counter \-p 1000
.fi
.RE
.PP
Reproducible test run:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen vcan0 \-n 5000 \-r 1000 \-\-seed 42
.fi
.RE
.PP
Burst mode \(em simulate ECU reprogramming traffic (2\ s at 5000\ fps, 500\ ms at 50\ fps):
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen can0 \-\-burst \-n 100000
.fi
.RE
.PP
Custom burst parameters (1\ s high at 10000\ fps, 200\ ms low at 100\ fps):
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen can0 \-\-burst \-\-burst\-high\-rate 10000 \\
    \-\-burst\-low\-rate 100 \-\-burst\-high\-ms 1000 \\
    \-\-burst\-low\-ms 200 \-n 50000
.fi
.RE
.PP
CANcorder quality-test protocol on ID 0x7E0:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen can0 \-\-data\-mode quality\-test \-\-id\-min 0x7E0 \\
    \-\-id\-max 0x7E0 \-r 1000 \-n 10000
.fi
.RE
.PP
UDS flash simulation \(em single reprogramming session:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen vcan0 \-\-uds\-flash \-n 1
.fi
.RE
.PP
UDS flash \(em double speed, 100 blocks, no errors:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen can0 \-\-uds\-flash \-n 1 \-\-speed 2.0 \\
    \-\-transfer\-blocks 100 \-\-no\-errors
.fi
.RE
.PP
UDS flash \(em custom IDs, no OBD polling, 3 sessions:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen can0 \-\-uds\-flash \-\-tester\-id 0x641 \\
    \-\-ecu\-id 0x642 \-\-no\-obd \-n 3
.fi
.RE
.PP
UDS flash \(em loop forever (Ctrl\-C to stop):
.PP
.RS
.nf
mcangen vcan0 \-\-uds\-flash
.fi
.RE
.SH RATE LIMITING
When \fB\-\-rate\fR is set, mcangen uses a hybrid sleep/busy-spin strategy for
precise timing. For intervals longer than 2\ ms it sleeps for most of the wait
and busy-spins the final millisecond. If the sender falls behind schedule, it
resets rather than bursting to catch up.
.PP
When \fB\-\-rate\fR is 0, frames are sent back-to-back with no
delay. Actual throughput will be limited by the kernel's send buffer and the
CAN bus bitrate. The default rate is 5\ fps, matching cangen's default 200\ ms gap.
.SH LIVE STATISTICS
When stderr is connected to an interactive terminal (and \fB\-\-quiet\fR and
\fB\-\-dump\fR are not set), mcangen displays a continuously updated status
line showing frames sent, instantaneous and average fps, error count, and
elapsed time. The line is overwritten in place every second.
.SH BURST MODE
When \fB\-\-burst\fR is given, mcangen cycles between a high-rate phase and a
low-rate phase. This emulates the traffic pattern typical of ECU
reprogramming: large blocks of data are transferred at high speed, followed
by short idle periods while the ECU erases or programs flash. The default
cycle is 2\ s at 5000\ fps / 500\ ms at 50\ fps. All four parameters are
tuneable. Burst mode is mutually exclusive with \fB\-\-rate\fR.
.SH UDS FLASH MODE
When \fB\-\-uds\-flash\fR is given, mcangen generates a complete UDS (Unified
Diagnostic Services) ECU reprogramming session directly on the CAN bus. Both
the tester (diagnostic tool) and the ECU sides of the conversation are
produced, so any CAN bus monitor or application under test sees realistic
bidirectional traffic with proper ISO-TP segmentation and timing.
.PP
A session consists of 16 phases:
.IP 1. 4
Enter extended diagnostic session (0x10/0x03)
.IP 2. 4
Read ECU identification: VIN, serial, SW/HW version, part number (0x22, multi-frame)
.IP 3. 4
Enter programming session (0x10/0x02)
.IP 4. 4
Security access with seed & key exchange (0x27)
.IP 5. 4
Disable normal communication (0x28)
.IP 6. 4
Disable DTC setting (0x85)
.IP 7. 4
Check programming preconditions (0x31, routine 0xFF00)
.IP 8. 4
Erase memory with response-pending (0x31, routine 0xFF01, NRC 0x78)
.IP 9. 4
Request download for 256\ KB at address 0x00080000 (0x34)
.IP 10. 4
Transfer data blocks via multi-frame ISO-TP (0x36, 50\(en150 blocks)
.IP 11. 4
Request transfer exit (0x37)
.IP 12. 4
Check programming dependencies (0x31, routine 0xFF02)
.IP 13. 4
Read and clear DTCs (0x19, 0x14), verify cleared
.IP 14. 4
ECU hard reset (0x11)
.PP
Unless \fB\-\-no\-errors\fR is given, the simulator occasionally injects
negative responses with automatic retries: busy repeat request (NRC 0x21),
conditions not correct (NRC 0x22), invalid security key (NRC 0x35), wrong
block sequence counter (NRC 0x73), and response pending (NRC 0x78).
.PP
Between sessions (unless \fB\-\-no\-obd\fR), OBD-II polling traffic is
generated using functional addressing (0x7DF) with responses on the
configured ECU ID. Polled PIDs include engine RPM (0x0C), coolant
temperature (0x05), vehicle speed (0x0D), and throttle position (0x11),
with simulated sensor values that drift over time.
.PP
For more sophisticated ECU simulation with custom services, security
algorithms, and configurable identifiers, see the
.B ECUmulator
project.
.SH RESILIENCE
mcangen is designed to keep running across transient interface failures
rather than die on the first hiccup.
.SS Interface vanishing
When the interface goes admin-down, is removed (\fBip link delete\fR), or
the underlying device disappears (USB unplug), \fBwrite\fR(2) starts failing
with \fBENODEV\fR or \fBENETDOWN\fR. mcangen closes the dead socket and
re-opens with exponential backoff (100\ ms\ \(en\ 30\ s cap), refusing to
declare success until the interface is administratively up again
(\fBIFF_UP\fR via \fBgetifaddrs\fR(3)). The live stats line keeps ticking
through the outage so the gap is visible.
.SS BUS-OFF detection
The CAN controller can enter the BUS-OFF error state without producing any
visible \fBwrite\fR(2) error \(em on many drivers, frames simply queue
silently while no actual bus traffic flows. mcangen opens a dedicated
second socket with \fBCAN_RAW_ERR_FILTER\fR set to
\fBCAN_ERR_BUSOFF\ |\ CAN_ERR_RESTARTED\fR, and a background thread reads
error frames from it. On \fBCAN_ERR_BUSOFF\fR the live stats line shows
\fBBUS-OFF\fR, the send loop pauses with backoff, and frames that
\fIwould\fR have been written are counted as errors instead of as phantom
successes. On \fBCAN_ERR_RESTARTED\fR (kernel auto-restart, manual
\fBip link set <iface> type can restart\fR, or \fB\-\-auto\-restart\fR),
transmission transparently resumes.
.SS Auto-recovery for drivers without do_set_mode
Not every CAN driver implements the kernel hook (\fBdo_set_mode\fR) needed
to honor \fBrestart-ms\fR or the \fBIFLA_CAN_RESTART\fR netlink attribute.
The \fBgs_usb\fR driver \(em used by candleLight, Canable v1, and most
cheap STM32-based USB-CAN adapters \(em is the notable mainline example.
For those, \fBip link set <iface> type can restart\fR returns
\fBEOPNOTSUPP\fR and the kernel cannot self-recover. With
\fB\-\-auto\-restart\fR, mcangen works around this by cycling the interface
itself via raw netlink (\fBRTM_NEWLINK\fR with \fBIFF_UP\fR cleared, then
set), with a 150\ ms settle in between. Repeated rapid restarts back off
exponentially up to 60\ s so a permanently bad bus cannot pin the CPU.
.SS Startup BUS-OFF recovery
On startup, mcangen queries the CAN controller state via \fBRTM_GETLINK\fR
(walking \fBIFLA_LINKINFO\fR \(-> \fBIFLA_INFO_DATA\fR \(->
\fBIFLA_CAN_STATE\fR); if it is already \fBCAN_STATE_BUS_OFF\fR the
interface is cycled once before the send socket is opened so the user does
not have to poke \fBip link\fR first. This one-shot recovery is independent
of \fB\-\-auto\-restart\fR (which gates continuous runtime recovery) but
also needs \fBCAP_NET_ADMIN\fR; on \fBEPERM\fR mcangen warns and continues.
.SH PERMISSIONS
Sending CAN frames requires the \fBCAP_NET_RAW\fR capability. Either run as
root or grant the capability:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo setcap cap_net_raw+ep /path/to/mcangen
.fi
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-auto\-restart\fR additionally requires \fBCAP_NET_ADMIN\fR to bring
the interface down and back up via netlink:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo setcap cap_net_admin,cap_net_raw=eip /path/to/mcangen
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
All frames sent successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Error (invalid arguments, socket failure, or excessive write errors).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cangen (1),
.BR candump (1),
.BR cansend (1),
.BR ip (8)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/mickeyl/mcangen/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Michael \(aqMickey\(aq Lauer <mickey@vanille\-media.de>
.SH LICENSE
MIT License. See the LICENSE file in the source distribution.
